In this lecture, I'm going to walk through
a basic data cleaning process with you and
introduce you to a few
more pandas API functions.
Let's start by bringing in pandas.
So import pandas as pd and
let's load our data set.
We're going to be cleaning the list
of presidents in the US that I got
from Wikipedia.
So df=pd.read CSV and we'll bring
in data sets / presidents.CSV and
let's just take a look at
some of the data, so df.head.
Okay, so we have some presidents,
some dates.
I see a bunch of footnotes in the born
column which may cause issues.
So let's start with cleaning up that
name into first name and last name,
I'm going to tackle this with a regex.
So I want to create two new columns and
apply a regex to the projection
of the president column.
So here's one solution.
We could make a copy of
the president column.
So I'll say df sub first that creates
a new column equals df sub president and
then we can call replace and we just have
a pattern that matches the last name and
sets it to an empty string.
So df sub first equals df sub
first.replace and then the regex pattern
might be a whitespace character followed
by any number of characters
we just want to null this out.
So the next value is just an empty
string and we say reg x equals true
remember to use replace and
now let's take a look at this, so df.head.
So that works but it's kind of gross and
it's slow since we had to make a full copy
of the column and
then go through and update strings.
There are a few other ways
that we can deal this.
Let me show you the most general one
first and that's the apply function.
So let's drop the column we just made.
So we'll just remember del df
sub first should drop the column
immediately in place.
No copy of a data frame being returned.
So the apply function on a data frame will
take some arbitrary function you have
written and apply it to either a series,
a single column or
a data frame across all rows or columns.
Let's write a function which just splits
a string into two pieces using a single
row of data.
So we'll call this def split name and
we pass in a parameters the row.
So the row is a single series object which
is a single row indexed by column values.
So let's extract the first name and
create a new entry into the series.
So DF sub first equals
row sub president.split on space and
we'll just take the first item.
And so remember here when you're doing
this that the row that comes into this is
whatever data frame we apply it to.
So we're going to use the data frame
above but you could potentially reuse
this with function with any data
frame that has a president column.
So let's do the same with the last
word in the string to so row sub last
equals row sub president.split and
then we'll just take minus 1.
Remember when you're indexing into a list
if you index negatively that counts
from the back end of the list.
So this is a handy way
to get the last item and
that way we don't have to worry about
any middle names or initials in there.
And so now we just return the row and
the pandas.apply will take care of merging
them back together into the data frame.
So this function will just return row.
And so now if we apply this to the
dataframe indicating that we want to apply
it across columns,
we should get our result.
So DF equals df dot apply,
we say which function we're interested in
applying split name and then we say
axes equals columns and then df.head.
So it's pretty questionable as to
whether that's less gross but it
achieves the result and I find that I use
the apply function regularly in my work.
The panda series has a couple of other
nice convenience functions though and
next I'd like to touch
on one called extract.
So let's drop our first name and
last name.
So we'll del both first and last.
So extract takes a regular expression as
input and specifically requires you to set
capture groups that correspond to
the output columns that you're interested
in and this is a great place for
you to pause in the video and reflect.
If you were going to write a regular
expression that returned groups and
had just the first name and last name
in it, what would that look like?
So here's my solution where we
would match three groups, but
only return to the first name and
the last name.
So the pattern remember the groups
are always in parentheses.
So I'm going to have three
sets of parentheses.
And the first one I want anchored to the
beginning of the string any characters or
digits, any number of those.
The second one is question mark colon
because I want this group not to
be returned and I want any number of
characters followed by a white space and
then the last one I want any
number of characters, but
I want to anchor this to
the back of the string.
So now the extract function is built into
the str attribute of the series object so
we can call it using
Series.str.extract sub pattern.
So in this case we say df sub president.
Remember when you've got a single
column that you're taking out of a data
frame it's projected as a series,
.str.extract and then pass in a pattern.
The pattern we're interested in,
we'll take a look at the head of this.
So that looks pretty nice
other than the column names.
But if we name the groups
we get column names out.
So I'm just going to
update this pattern and
remember that we can create named groups.
So we just say question mark capital P and
then within the less-than and
greater-than signs, we put the name of
the group we want so we'll say one for
first and then of course the middle one,
we're not interested in capturing and
returning and
the last one we'll call last.
So now we'll call extract.
So again names equals df sub
president.str.extract sub
pattern.head and we'll print out names.
And we could just copy these into
our main data frame if we want to so
we could say df sub first
equals name sub first and
df sub last equals name sub last and
print out the data frame.
So it's worth looking at the pandas
Str module for other functions,
which we've been written specifically
to clean up strings and data frames and
you can find that in the docs
in working with text section.
And here's a URL to that.
Now, let's move on to
clean up the born column.
First, let's get rid of anything that
isn't in the pattern of day, month, year.
So here I'm going to do this.
I'm going to do df sub born
equals df sub born.str.extract so
I'm going to use capture groups again, but
I'm only going to have one capture group.
So it's a little bit cheating maybe and
I'm going to match any number of
characters three times
followed by a space,
followed by any number of characters
somewhere in that one to two length.
Followed by a space and then one to two
length is really because I want to capture
a single digits like first, second, third
as well as double digits like 10th, 11th,
12th.
And then any number of characters for
time to get that last bit and
let's print out the head.
So that cleans up the date format, but
I want to foreshadow something else here.
The type of this column
is actually an object and
we know that's what pandas uses
when it's dealing with strings but
pandas actually has really
interesting date-time features.
In fact,
one of the reasons West McKinney put his
efforts into the library was to
deal with financial transactions.
So if I were building this out further,
I would actually update this column
to write the data type as well.
So to do that,
I would say df sub born equals and
then I would call on the top
level of the pandas module.
There's a function called to date time and
I would just pass it df sub born.
So I would pass it the whole series and
let's take a look at what that looks like.
So this would make subsequent processing
on the dataframe around days
such as getting every president who was
born in a given time span much easier.
Now most of the other columns in this data
set I would clean up in a similar fashion
and this should be good
practice activity for you.
So I recommend that you pause this video,
open up a notebook for yourself for
the lecture.
If you don't already have
it opened of course and
then finish cleaning up the data frame.
In this lecture I introduced
you to the str module,
which has a number of important functions
for cleaning panda's dataframes.
You don't have to use these.
I actually use applied quite a bit myself,
especially if I don't need high level
performance data cleaning because
my data set is usually small.
But the str functions
are incredibly useful and
they build on your existing
knowledge of regular expressions and
because they're vectorized they're
very efficient to be using as well.